We're in course 9.
We're talking about
the NTFS file system.
In this module, we're going to be
talking about data runs.
In our last module,
we took a look at the data
attribute in a file record.
The one we looked
at was resident.
We saw the attribute type.
We talked that hexadecimal
80 is a data attribute.
We find this within
a file record.
Right after that, we see the
length of the attribute.
Hexadecimal 48 is the number
of bytes in the attribute.
Next, we see the resident,
non-resident flag.
It's technically called
the non-resident flag
and we can see here is
00 so the flag is not
flying so this would be a
resident data attribute.
Then we can move over to
hexadecimal 1C over here.
We can see the offset to
the data from the start of
the attribute and
that would be 18.
We go down one line and over
eight bytes and
that would take us
to the start of our data.
We can see this is
an example of a resident data
attribute written in the ASCII.
This is how we would read
a resident data attributes
within a file record entry.
Now, for a non-resident
data attribute,
you're going to have the
same thing in the header.
You're going to have
the attribute type.
You're going to have the
length of the attribute.
When we get to the
non-resident flag,
we see that that flag is up.
It's a 01.
This indicates to us that this is
a non-resident data attribute
and that the data
for this file is
located not within the
MFT record itself,
but somewhere out on the drive.
Next, we need to
find the offset to
the data from the start
of the attribute.
We can see right here,
we go down two lines and we
can see that this offset,
we have a hexadecimal 40.
That tells us that our data run,
or where we can find the
location for the data out on
the drive is going to be
four lines down from the
start of the attribute.
We count four lines down, 1, 2,
3, 4, and this takes
us to our data run.
Now, our data run
contains a run list.
We're going to take
a very good look
at the data run itself.
The first byte in
the data run is what's
called a run header.
We interpret that by splitting it
into two nibbles
and then adding it
together to get the total number
of bytes in our data run.
If we add two and one,
we come up with three.
That tells us our data
run is three bytes long.
The first right here, the one,
our left nibble represents
this number one right here
represents hexadecimal 55.
This is the length in
clusters of our data run.
The decimal, the nibble 2,
the far left nibble represents
the starting cluster.
The starting cluster is
going to be over here,
and it's going to be 8B,
05, but it will be read
little-endian so it'd be 05, 8B.
Tells us our starting cluster.
Then when you get to all zeros,
you're at the end
of your data run.
Here, we have a visual of
what I was talking about.
We have our run list header
split into two nibbles.
The two and the one, we
add 2 plus 1, we get 3.
The one, the right nibble
represents the size,
how many clusters?
The left nibble represents what's
called the starting extent
or the starting cluster.
That represents these
two bytes here.
The 8B and the 05 tell
us the starting cluster.
We split it into two nibbles.
The right nibble
represents the size;
the first byte in the data run.
The left nibble is two so
we know we need two bytes.
That represents the next
two bytes in our data run,
and that tells us the
starting cluster.
We're going to go ahead
and take a look at
this in Active Disk Editor.
The items we're going to
need for this walk-through,
we're going to need
active disk editor,
we're going to need our NTFS VHD,
and we're going to need
a Windows calculator,
or any type of calculator
will work just fine.
The first thing we're
going to need to do for
our walk-through
is attach our VHD.
We're going to bring
up Disk Management.
We're going to go to Actions.
Attach VHD, navigate out to
where our NTFS.vhd stored.
Select it and click "Open".
Then click "Okay" and
our VHD will mount.
As before, make sure you
know the disk number,
the volume that we're
going to be working with
is the second volume
in on the drive,
the first NTFS volume
on my computer it's B on
yours it may be different,
and the size is 200 megabytes,
and the volume label is NTFS.
Let's go ahead and start
Active Disk Editor.
We're going to
select "Open Disk".
We're going to select "Volumes",
and then we're going to select
our NTFS volume then we're
going to click "Open".
Again we're going
to be brought to
the volume boot record.
Let's take a quick look
in the volume boot record
at our sectors per cluster,
which is eight in our bytes
per sector, which are 512.
If we multiply 8 times 512,
we get 4,096 bytes in a cluster.
Let's go to Browse File Records.
Scroll down and let's take a look
at this resident.txt first.
We looked at this
file record before,
we noticed the header.
We see it says file,
so we know we're looking
at MFT file record.
We see the ASCII file.
Now we can see our attributes
within the file record.
We have our standard
information attribute,
and we parse that
in the last module.
We have our filename
attribute, hexadecimal 30.
We talked about our
object ID attribute,
and now we have our
data attribute.
The first part of
our attribute is
actually called an
attribute header.
It tells us the type
of attribute we have.
It tells us the size,
the length of the attribute,
and right here is our
non-resident flag.
In this particular file,
we see that our non-resident
flag is not up,
so this indicates to us that
this is flat resident file,
because the non-resident
flag is not set.
This will tell us our offset
to the attribute data.
Right here outlined in pink,
this is the offset to
the attribute data.
You go down one line
and over eight bytes,
and that will take us to the
start of our attribute data.
We can see this file is resident.
It's a very small file and
it's able to fit right inside
the master file table record
and that would be
a resident file.
Now let's go back
up to the top and
take a look at Non_Resident.pdf.
Again, we have our
attribute header
which starts with
the ASCII Word file.
We can see file that tells you
you're looking at
MFT file record.
The first attribute will
be the standard
information attribute,
and this is what gives us
all our times created,
modified, record changed,
and last access.
Then we have our
filename attribute,
and hexadecimal 30 indicates
a file name attribute has
the length of the attribute.
The non-resident flag and
this will be resident.
Then we have the data.
The start of our attribute.
We can see the file name down
here and it is Non_Resident.pdf.
Now we do have an attribute 40,
which is an object ID attribute,
which will give us right here
that globally unique identifier,
that GUID for the file.
That's an object ID attribute.
Just below that,
working our way down,
we have our hexadecimal
80 attribute,
which is our data attribute.
Now this will either
contain the data like
it did in our resident.txt,
or it'll tell us where the
data is out on the drive.
We have the type of attribute,
the length of the attribute,
and our non-resident flag.
We can see our
non-resident flag is 01,
that means our flag
is flying and this is
a non-resident data attribute.
The data for this file is
going to be out on the drive.
Just keep in mind, we're
looking at file records.
These give us information
about the file.
The data can be resident,
but most likely the data
attribute will be non-resident,
unless you have a very
small file that will fit.
Now we have to navigate
this attribute and
find our data run.
We go two lines down to find
the location of our
offset to the data run.
From the beginning
of the attribute,
you go down two lines,
and that will tell you where
the data run is located.
This gives us the offset to
the data run as hexadecimal 40.
That means four lines
down from the start of
the attribute will
give us our data run.
You count down one,
two, three, four.
This is our first data run.
We can see it is a 2 and a 1.
Remember the data run header,
we have to split this
byte into two nibbles.
The 1, the right side,
relates to the byte
directly next to it,
directly to the right of it.
This indicates the size,
and in this case,
it is one cluster.
It gives us the cluster count.
The 2 represents where
the starting cluster is,
and we know it's two bytes
long because it's a 2.
We knew the size was one
byte long because it's a 1.
The 2 represents the next two
bytes in the data run list.
These two bytes indicate where
the first cluster
for this file is.
They're read little-endian.
I'm going to swipe
them right to left,
and I'm going to look
at my Data Interpreter.
I have a 16-bit,
and remember these
are signed values.
It's a 16-bit signed value.
We have a number of 17,065.
Now I'm going to need
my Windows calculator,
and I'm going to put in 17,065.
I'm just going to
leave that be for now.
That's where it starts and
it's one cluster long.
This is a part of it.
This file is fragmented.
We have four data runs here,
one, two, three, four.
This is our next data run.
The first byte is
the data run header.
It tells us the
length of the run.
We split it into two nibbles,
and 2 and 1 is 3,
so my data run is
three bytes long.
The right nibble is
a 1 that tells me
the size in clusters
of my data run,
and that 1 refers to
the bytes directly
to the right of it.
I have a 09 for a cluster count,
so this data run is
nine clusters long.
Now let me look at the
left nibble, it's a 2.
It tells me my starting
cluster is two bytes long.
I look to the next two
bytes in my data run,
and I read them little-endian.
I read it BF, BF.
That is a 16-bit signed integer.
When you have a signed integer,
it is possible to have
a negative number if
the most significant bit is on.
With a B, the most
significant bit
will be on because it's
greater than eight.
My 16-bit signed value
is negative 16,449.
I'm going to bring my calculator,
and I'm going to subtract 16,449.
That's going to give me 616.
When I look at my data run,
I can see, yes,
it is telling me the first
part is in cluster 17,065,
and the second part
is in cluster 616,
which is what I got when I
translate it by data run.
That is where the second
chunk of our file would
be and this run is
nine clusters long.
Let's look at the next
piece of our data run.
Again, I have my data run
header and again it
is a two and a one.
The one represents
the size and clusters
and it refers to
the byte or bytes,
if that was a two, we will refer
to the two bytes to the right,
but it's a one so it refers
to the one byte to the right,
which is the cluster count.
Just hexadecimal 10.
The two refers to
the starting extent where
I have to go next to find
the piece of this file.
It says it's two
bytes in length and I
know it's to the
right of the length.
It's red little endian
so this is 01, 5A.
When I translate 01,
5A is a 16-bit signed
integer, I get 346.
We're going to bring our
calculator and we're going to
add 346 to 616,
plus 346 equals 962.
Let's look at our tool.
Yes, it says 962 is where
our next cluster is.
When you're reading a data run,
these values are relevant to
the last piece of the file.
We started at cluster
17,065 for our first piece,
and we jumped backwards to 616.
Now we're jumping forward to 962,
and these are cluster numbers.
Each piece of the file is
relevant to the last piece.
Now we go to our next
and final piece of
our data run here and I
have again a two and a one.
Split them into two nibbles,
add them together, I get a three.
I know my data run
is three bytes long.
I know the one, the right nibble
refers to the size in clusters.
It is a one and it refers to
the byte directly
to the right of it.
The cluster count here is 1D.
I need to translate 1D,
and I could see that it is 29,
so it's 29 clusters
in my final chunk.
Now the two refers to
the two bytes to the right
of the size in clusters.
Refer to these two
bytes the CF and
the EE and they're
red little-endian.
When I translate that to
a 16 bit because
there are two bytes,
16 bit signed integer,
I get negative 305.
I bring up my calculator
again and we're going
from the point we left
off at and we're
going to minus 305.
[NOISE] That gives us 657.
We look at our last cluster,
cluster 657, and
remember the length
was 29 clusters long.
Now, this is how we
read the data runs.
If we were going to
carve this file,
which we're going to do file
carving in a later module,
we would need to find
the beginning and
the end of each of
these runs so that we
could carve each
part of this file
out and put it back together,
because if you found
an unallocated MFT file record
and the data was not
overwritten on the drive,
you could follow the data run
and reconstruct your file,
and recover it that way.
We will do this one when
we cover file carving.